The Project Gutenberg eBook of Guide to the Canyon Area, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Guide to the Canyon Area

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: October 30, 2021 [eBook #66634]

Language: English

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUIDE TO THE CANYON
AREA ***





                              GUIDE TO THE
                              CANYON AREA


                                                                     15¢

    [Illustration: NATIONAL PARK SERVICE • Department of the Interior]

  This leaflet has been produced to increase your enjoyment of
  Yellowstone National Park by the Yellowstone Library and Museum
  Association in cooperation with the National Park Service. U. S.
  Department of the Interior

                                                                    4/78


There are miles of trails in the Canyon area. Many are well traveled,
short and paved; others are maintained and marked, but not paved.

The elevation of the Canyon rim is about 8000 feet, which makes even the
short walks surprisingly strenuous for many people. Take your time, and
wear good walking shoes or boots. At times it is wise to carry raingear.
On the longer trails you may want to carry water and a lunch, or
whatever food you think necessary.

As you travel, to avoid accidents, watch your footing and please stay on
the trails. Climbing into the Canyon off the established trails is both
dangerous and prohibited by law. Due to the steepness of the Canyon
walls many trails have been constructed in switchback (“zigzag”)
fashion. It is dangerous to cut across switchbacks. You can easily slip
and fall and you might knock rocks down on someone below you. You would
also cause ugly and unnatural erosion of the walls.

Do not throw anything into the canyon. Rocks and other hard objects
might injure someone below you. Litter is unsightly. Removing litter
from the Canyon is a dangerous and expensive job. Please help us keep
the area clean.

If you plan to hike overnight in the backcountry be sure to pick up a
backcountry permit at the Ranger Station. While there you can also
obtain the latest trail information and advice regarding the adequacy of
your equipment for the trip. For longer trips you should purchase a USGS
topographic map of the park. These are available at any Visitor Center.
Permits should be obtained before 5 p.m.

Most trails in Yellowstone are marked with orange or yellow metal tags
tacked to trees or posts. In wooded sections the tags are fairly small
(about 3×5 inches); in meadows they are larger (about 8 inches square).

Please STAY ON THE TRAILS. Getting lost in Yellowstone is no laughing
matter.

The Canyon area, like all of Yellowstone, is grizzly bear country. The
backcountry traveler always runs some risk of an encounter with a bear.
To reduce this risk, make noise as you hike through areas where you
might accidentally startle a bear. Whistle, or attach a bell to your
pack.

In season, guided horseback trips are regularly taken on some of the
Canyon area trails. In addition there are many pleasant half day and
full day rides that can be arranged. The saddle horse concession is
located 1½ miles south of Canyon Junction on the Lake-Canyon road.
Should you wish to bring in your own stock you should write the Chief
Ranger well in advance of your trip for particulars. If you intend to
keep your animals overnight in any of the developed areas they must be
boarded at the horse concession since there are no combined facilities
for grazing and camping.

On the road in Yellowstone you are on the threshold to wilderness. Plan
your off-the-road, wilderness trips with care. Savor the best that your
National Park has to offer—its backcountry. Please take only
pictures—let no one regret that you walked here.


Trail from Grandview to “P” Loop Cabin Area—Park at either end of the
trail. About ½ mile in length, this paved trail is especially pleasant
in the early morning.

Trail to the Brink of the Upper Falls—Park at the Upper Falls parking
area. This is a very short (⅛ mile) walk to the lip of the 109 foot
Upper Falls.

Trail to the Brink of the Lower Falls—Park at the southernmost parking
area on the North Rim Drive. The short (⅜ mile) walk along a paved trail
drops about 600 feet into the Canyon to the brink of the 308 foot Lower
Falls.

Red Rock Point Trail; Lookout Point—Park at the Lookout Point parking
area. The paved trail to Red Rock drops several hundred feet in about ⅜
of a mile. Lookout Point, on the rim, offers essentially the same view
of the Lower Falls as Red Rock, but does not permit the viewer to get as
close to the falls.

Grandview Trail—Park at the Grandview parking area. This is a very short
paved walk to a view of much of the Canyon.

Inspiration Point Trail—Park at the northernmost parking area on the
North Rim Drive. Several steps direct you down this short, paved walk to
an overlook providing a spectacular Canyon View.

North Rim Trail—Portions of this trail are paved. Starting at Chittenden
Bridge, the first ½ mile to the Upper Falls parking area takes the hiker
close to the river, a beautiful and impressive torrent as it approaches
the Canyon. From slightly west of the Upper Falls parking area the trail
continues past Crystal Falls, on Cascade Creek, to the Lower Falls
parking area, another ½ mile, then to Lookout Point (½ mile), to
Grandview Point (¼ mile), and finally to inspiration Point (1⅛ miles).
By trail, Inspiration Point is slightly more than 2¼ miles from the
Upper Falls parking area, and 2⅞ miles from Chittenden Bridge.


Though the full length of all trails is not shown on the map, a number
of longer hikes originate within the mapped area. A brief description of
these trails is given below. Backcountry permits are required for all
overnight hikes.

Howard Eaton Trail to Cascade, Grebe, Wolf, and Ice Lakes, and
Norris—From the trailhead ½ mile west of Canyon Junction on the
Norris-Canyon road the hiker passes through forest, meadow, and
marshland to Cascade Lake (3 miles), Grebe Lake (4¼ miles), Wolf Lake
(6¼ miles), Ice Lake (8½ miles), and Norris (12 miles). With the
exception of the trail up Observation Peak from Cascade Lake, trails in
this area have little vertical rise.

The climb to Observation Peak is strenuous, rising about 1400 feet in 3
miles. From the top the hiker is rewarded with an outstanding view of
some of Yellowstone’s wilderness country.

A second spur from the Howard Eaton Trail in this area takes the hiker
from Cascade Lake to Cascade Lake Picnic Area, which is 1¼ miles north
of Canyon Junction on the Tower-Canyon road. The hiker with limited time
can take a very enjoyable walk from the picnic area to the lake, then on
to the trailhead at the Norris-Canyon road, covering about 5 miles.

A third spur from the Howard Eaton Trail offers easy access to Grebe
Lake from the Norris-Canyon road. About 3 miles west of Canyon Junction,
at the Grebe Lake parking area and trailhead, a 3 mile trail goes
directly into Grebe Lake. When coupled with the Howard Eaton Trail from
either Cascade Lake Picnic Area, or the trailhead ½ mile west of the
junction, half day walks of about 6¼ and 7¼ miles, respectively, are
possible.

Howard Eaton Trail to Tower Fall; Seven Mile Hole—Park at the Glacial
Boulder. Until its juncture with the Howard Eaton Trail, this trail
follows the Canyon rim past a good view of Silver Cord Cascade, at 1½
miles. At almost 2 miles this rim trail joins the Howard Eaton. Continue
north at this junction.

At 3 miles the Seven Mile Hole Trail drops off to the right, 1250
vertical feet in about 2 miles. Hike it carefully, watch your footing,
and conserve your energy. Depending on your condition and the weather,
it can be a long climb back out of Seven Mile Hole.

If you continue north past the Seven Mile Hole Trail junction you will
approach Washburn Hot Springs at about 5¼ miles, and come to another
junction at 6¾ miles.

This is the Mt. Washburn Spur Trail, a secondary trail which climbs
about 2000 feet in a little more than 2¼ miles. This, too, is a long
climb even if you are in good condition. From the top it is 3½ miles
down the other side of the mountain to Dunraven Pass, on the
Tower-Canyon road.

If you continue north from the Mt. Washburn Spur Trail junction you
eventually reach Tower Junction, 20 miles from Glacial Boulder.


Uncle Tom’s Trail—A short walk into the Canyon at the base of the Lower
Falls. Because this is a very strenuous walk, dropping about 500 feet
over a series of stairways and paved inclines, it is not recommended for
people with heart and lung conditions. Much of the walk is constructed
of perforated steel sheeting, so you should wear comfortable,
flat-heeled walking shoes which will not get caught in the mesh.
Portions of the walk are often wet, which in the spring or fall, or in
the early morning, may be a film of ice. For those in good condition
this is a very rewarding walk.

Artist Point Trail—A very short walk from the parking area at the north
end of the South Rim Drive. Many people consider this the best view of
the Lower Falls and much of the Canyon.

Clear Lake Trail—From the Uncle Tom’s Trail parking area this trail
takes the hiker through large rolling meadows and forested areas to
Clear Lake. It is about 2¼ miles roundtrip. Bison and elk may be seen in
these meadows in the early mornings and late afternoons, especially in
the fall. Large ground squirrel populations and an abundance of
succulent grasses and plant roots often attract bears to these meadows
in the spring, where they spend hours digging and grazing.

South Rim Trail—Park at the large lot near Chittenden Bridge. This
partly paved trail parallels the Canyon for 3¼ miles to Sublime Point.
Many striking viewpoints of both falls and the Canyon can be reached on
this trail, as well as access to Uncle Tom’s Trail, Artist Point,
Lilypad Lake (about ¾ of a mile from Artist Point), and Sublime Point
(about 1¼ miles from Artist Point).

Ribbon Lake Trail—From the Chittenden Bridge parking area follow the
markers along the Wapiti Lake Trail until you come to a junction, at
about 3 miles. Bear left (north) at the junction; Ribbon Lake is about ¾
of a mile farther. Connecting trails to Lilypad Lake, Clear Lake, and
the South Rim Trail offer several possible variations to this trip.


As with the longer trails on the north side of the Canyon, the full
length of all trails is not shown on the map, but all of the trips
described below originate on the mapped area. Backcountry permits are
required for all overnight hikes.

Wapiti Lake Trail—Park at Chittenden Bridge parking area. This full
day’s hike up and over the southern end of the heavily forested Mirror
Plateau to Wapiti Lake is a reward in itself for the strong hiker. The
lake is about 18 miles from Chittenden Bridge.

Sour Creek Trail—Park at Chittenden Bridge parking lot. This very
popular riding trail is also a beautiful walk. Allow a little more than
a half a day for the roundtrip walk to Wrangler Lake. Follow the Wapiti
Lake trail for about 1½ miles. Follow the signs at the junction, bearing
right (south) to the lake, an additional 3¼ miles. Most of the way is
through large rolling meadows at the northern end of Hayden Valley. Elk
often graze at Wrangler Lake early and late in the day.

Howard Eaton Trail to Lake—Allow a full day for the hike from Chittenden
Bridge through Hayden Valley on the east side of the Yellowstone River.
Grizzly bear, bison, elk, and moose—or their sign—are commonly seen on
this walk. All large animals are potentially dangerous and should not be
approached. A lone bull bison is alone for several reasons, one of which
may be that he just does not want any company. Also, for your own safety
and for their well-being you should never disturb wildlife with young.

The river teems with life. It is closed to fishing in Hayden Valley so
that nesting waterfowl can raise their young in peace. Look for ducks,
geese, trumpeter swans, pelicans, muskrat, mink, otter, and coyotes.

    [Illustration: GRAND CANYON AND FALLS OF THE YELLOWSTONE
    TRAILS, ROADS, AND FACILITIES]

  CANYON JCT.
    Showers And Laundry
    Cabins
    Campground
    Amphitheater
    Gas Station
    Visitor Center
    “P” Loop Cabins
    Riding Stable
      To Tower Junction
      To Norris Junction
  North Rim Drive
    Service Road
    Chittenden Bridge
    To Yellowstone Lake
  Cascade Lake Trail
  Howard Eaton Trail
    To Tower
    To 7 Mile Hole
    To Lake
  North Rim Trail
    Brink of Falls Trail
    Lookout Point
      Red Rock Point
    Grandview
    Glacial Boulder
    Inspiration Point
  Yellowstone River
    UPPER FALLS
    Cascade Creek
      Crystal Falls
    LOWER FALLS
  South Rim Trail
    Uncle Tom’s Trail
    Artist Point
    Sublime Point
    Silver Cord Cascade
  South Rim Drive
    UNCLE TOM’S PARKING AREA
  Clear Lake Trail
    Clear Lake
    Lily Pad Lake
  Ribbon Lake Trail
    Ribbon Lake
  Wapiti Lake Trail
  Sour Cr. Trail
      C.M.—T.T.—P.T. 67




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GUIDE TO THE CANYON AREA ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
